##1: Ameletus Eaton
Imago. The compound eyes contiguous (in males), or widely separated (in females); rounded. Fore-wings with R5 and R4 joined basally. Hind-wings present. The hind-wings of the female imagines more than one fifth the length of the fore-wings. Hind tarsi slightly shorter than the tibia. Hind tarsi with 4 moveable segments. The hind tarsal claws unalike, being one pointed and one blunt. The abdomen with two tails. Male claspers separate. Nymph. The outer tails hairy on the inner side only. Gills mostly at the sides of the abdomen; not fringed with filaments on both sides. Classification. Superfamily Heptagenioidea. Family Siphlonuridae. British representation. 1 species (A. inopinatus). ##

##2: Baetis Leach
Imago. The compound eyes distinctly two-lobed (in males), or rounded (in females); upper lobe in the males, turbanate. Fore-wings with R5 detached basally from R4. The marginal fore-wing veinlets paired. Hind-wings present. The hind-wings of the female imagines no more than one fifth the length of the fore-wings. The hind-wing costa smoothly curved, or with a conspicuous projection. Hind tarsi with 4 moveable segments, or with 2–3 moveable segments (?). The abdomen with two tails. Nymph. The outer tails hairy on the inner side only. Gills mostly at the sides of the abdomen; not fringed with filaments on both sides; never comprising a plate bearing a tuft of filaments. Classification. Superfamily Baetoidea. Family Baetidae. British representation. 9 species; B. atrebatinus (Dark Olive Dun and Spinner), B. buceratus, B. digitatus, B. fuscatus (Pale Watery Dun and male Spinner, Golden Spinner female), B. muticus (Iron Blue Dun, Iron Blue or Jenny Spinner male, and Little Claret female Spinner), B. niger, B. rhodani (Large Dark Olive Dun and male Spinner, Large Red female Spinner), B. scambus Small Dark Olive Dun and male Spinner, (Small Red female Spinner), and B. vernus (Medium Olive Dun and male Spinner, Red Spinner female). ##

##3: Brachycercus Curtis
Eurycaenis Bengtsson. Imago. The compound eyes rounded. Second antennal segment three times as long as the first. Wings fringed in the imago. Fore-wings with R5 and R4 joined basally. Hind-wings absent. The fore-legs widely separated under the thorax. Hind tarsi with 4 moveable segments. The abdomen with three tails. Nymph. Gills mostly lying on the upper surface of the abdomen; not fringed with filaments on both sides. Classification. Superfamily Baetoidea. Family Caenidae. British representation. 1 species (B. harrisella). ##

##4: Caenis Stephens
Ordella Campion. Imago. The compound eyes rounded. Second antennal segment no more than twice as long as the first. Wings fringed in the imago. Fore-wings with R5 and R4 joined basally. Hind-wings absent. The fore-legs inserted relatively close together under the thorax. Hind tarsi with 4 moveable segments. The abdomen with three tails. Nymph. Gills mostly lying on the upper surface of the abdomen; not fringed with filaments on both sides. Classification. Superfamily Baetoidea. Family Caenidae. British representation. 5 species; C. horaria, C. luctuosa, C. macrura, C. rivulorum, C. robusta (all the Duns and Spinners colloquially named Angler’s Curse). ##

##5: Centroptilum Eaton
Imago. The compound eyes distinctly two-lobed (in males), or rounded (in females); upper lobe in the males, turbanate. Fore-wings with R5 detached basally from R4. The marginal fore-wing veinlets single. Hind-wings present. The hind-wings of the female imagines no more than one fifth the length of the fore-wings. The hind-wing costa with a conspicuous projection. Hind tarsi with 4 moveable segments, or with 2–3 moveable segments (?). The abdomen with two tails. Nymph. The outer tails hairy on the inner side only. Gills mostly at the sides of the abdomen; not fringed with filaments on both sides. Classification. Superfamily Baetoidea. Family Baetidae. British representation. 2 species; C. luteolum (Small Spurwing or Pale Watery Dun, Small Spurwing male Spinner, and Little Amber female Spinner), and C. pennulatum (Large Spurwing Dun and male Spinner, Large Amber female Spinner). ##

##6: Cloeon Leach
Imago. The compound eyes rounded. Fore-wings with R5 detached basally from R4. Hind-wings absent. The hind-wings of the female imagines more than one fifth the length of the fore-wings. Hind tarsi with 4 moveable segments. The first segment of the hind tarsus about twice as long as the second. The abdomen with two tails. Nymph. The outer tails hairy on the inner side only. Gills mostly at the sides of the abdomen; not fringed with filaments on both sides. Classification. Superfamily Baetoidea. Family Baetidae. British representation. 2 species; C. dipterum (Pond Olive or Lake Olive Dun, Pond Olive male Spinner, Apricot Spinner female), and C. simile. ##

##7: Ecdyonurus Eaton
Ecdyurus Eaton. Imago. The compound eyes contiguous (in males), or widely separated (in females); rounded. Wings more or less spotted with brown or blackish. Fore-wings with R5 and R4 joined basally. Hind-wings present. The hind-wings of the female imagines more than one fifth the length of the fore-wings. Hind tarsi with 5 moveable segments. The hind tarsal claws unalike, being one pointed and one blunt. The abdomen with two tails. Male claspers crossed. The lobes of the penis very broad-tipped, and closely approximated. Nymph. Gills mostly at the sides of the abdomen; not fringed with filaments on both sides; mostly consisting of a plate bearing a tuft of filaments. Classification. Superfamily Heptagenioidea. Family Heptageniidae. British representation. 4 species; E. dispar (Autumn or August Dun, Autumn or Red Spinners), E. insignis (Large Green Dun and Spinners), E. torrentis (Large Brook Dun and Spinners, or Great Red Spinner), and E. venosus (Late March Brown Dun and Spinners, or Great Red Spinner). ##

##8: Ephemera Linnaeus
Imago. The compound eyes rounded. Wings more or less spotted with brown or blackish. Fore-wings with veins M1 and Cu1 strongly strongly diverging basally; with R5 and R4 joined basally. Hind-wings present. The hind-wing costa smoothly curved. Hind tarsi with 4 moveable segments, or with 2–3 moveable segments. The abdomen with three tails. The lobes of the penis without recurved appendages. Nymph. Gills all densely fringed with filaments on both sides. Classification. Superfamily Ephemeroidea. Family Ephemeridae. British representation. 3 species; E. danica (Mayfly or Green Drake Dun, Mayfly male Spinner, and Mayfly, Spent Gnat or Black Drake female Spinner), E. lineata, and E. vulgata (Drake Mackerel Dun and Spinners). ##

##9: Ephemerella Walsh
Imago. The compound eyes rounded. Fore-wings with R5 and R4 joined basally. Hind-wings present. The hind-wing costa smoothly curved. Hind tarsi with 4 moveable segments. The abdomen with three tails. The lobes of the penis without recurved appendages. Nymph. Gills mostly lying on the upper surface of the abdomen; not fringed with filaments on both sides. Classification. Superfamily Baetoidea. Family Ephemerellidae. British representation. 2 species; E. ignita (Blue Winged Olive or B.W.O. Dun and male Spinner, Sherry Spinner female), and E. notata (Yellow Evening Dun and Spinners). ##

##10: Habrophlebia Eaton
Imago. The compound eyes distinctly two-lobed (in males), or rounded (in females); upper lobe in the males rounded. Fore-wings with R5 and R4 joined basally. Hind-wings present. The hind-wing costa with a conspicuous projection. Hind tarsi with 4 moveable segments. The abdomen with three tails. Nymph. The outer tails hairy on both sides. Gills mostly at the sides of the abdomen; not fringed with filaments on both sides; never comprising a plate bearing a tuft of filaments. Classification. Superfamily Baetoidea. Family Leptophlebiidae. British representation. 1 species; H. fusca (Ditch Dun and Spinners). ##

##11: Heptagenia Walsh
Imago. The compound eyes widely separated; rounded. Fore-wings with R5 and R4 joined basally. Hind-wings present. The hind-wings of the female imagines more than one fifth the length of the fore-wings. Hind tarsi with 5 moveable segments. The hind tarsal claws unalike, being one pointed and one blunt. The abdomen with two tails. The lobes of the penis without recurved appendages. Nymph. Gills mostly at the sides of the abdomen; not fringed with filaments on both sides; mostly consisting of a plate bearing a tuft of filaments. Classification. Superfamily Heptagenioidea. Family Heptageniidae. British representation. 4 species; H. fuscogrisea (Brown May Dun and Spinners), H. lateralis (Dusky Yellowstreak or Dark Dun, Dusky Yellowstreak Spinners), H. longicauda, and H. sulphurea (Yellow May Dun and Spinners). ##

##12: Leptophlebia Westwood
Imago. The compound eyes distinctly two-lobed (in males), or rounded (in females); upper lobe in the males rounded. Fore-wings with R5 and R4 joined basally. Hind-wings present. The hind-wing costa smoothly curved. Hind tarsi with 4 moveable segments. The abdomen with three tails. The lobes of the penis each with one recurved appendage. Nymph. The outer tails hairy on both sides. Gills mostly at the sides of the abdomen; not fringed with filaments on both sides; never comprising a plate bearing a tuft of filaments. Classification. Superfamily Baetoidea. Family Leptophlebiidae. British representation. 2 species; L. marginata (Sepia Dun and Spinners), and L. vespertina (Claret Dun and Spinners). ##

##13: Paraleptophlebia Lestage
Imago. The compound eyes distinctly two-lobed (in males), or rounded (in females); upper lobe in the males rounded. Fore-wings with R5 and R4 joined basally. Hind-wings present. The hind-wing costa smoothly curved. Hind tarsi with 4 moveable segments. The abdomen with three tails. The lobes of the penis each with two recurved appendages. Nymph. The outer tails hairy on both sides. Gills mostly at the sides of the abdomen; not fringed with filaments on both sides; never comprising a plate bearing a tuft of filaments. Classification. Superfamily Baetoidea. Family Leptophlebiidae. British representation. 3 species; P. cincta (Purple Dun and Spinners), P. submarginata (Turkey Brown Dun and Spinners), and P. werneri. ##

##14: Potamanthus Pictet
Imago. The compound eyes rounded. Wings unspotted. Fore-wings with veins M1 and Cu1 strongly strongly diverging basally; with R5 and R4 joined basally. Hind-wings present. Hind tarsi with 4 moveable segments, or with 2–3 moveable segments. The abdomen with three tails. Nymph. Gills all densely fringed with filaments on both sides. Classification. Superfamily Ephemeroidea. Family Potamanthidae. British representation. 1 species (P. luteus). ##

##15: Procloeon Bengtsson
Imago. The compound eyes rounded. Fore-wings with R5 detached basally from R4. Hind-wings absent. The hind-wings of the female imagines more than one fifth the length of the fore-wings. Hind tarsi with 4 moveable segments. The first segment of the hind tarsus about three times as long as the second. The abdomen with two tails. Nymph. The outer tails hairy on the inner side only. Gills mostly at the sides of the abdomen; not fringed with filaments on both sides. Classification. Superfamily Baetoidea. Family Baetidae. British representation. 1 species; P. bifidum (Pale Evening or Pale Watery Dun, Pale Evening Spinners). ##

##16: Rhithrogena Eaton
Imago. The compound eyes contiguous (in males), or widely separated (in females); rounded. Fore-wings with R5 and R4 joined basally. Hind-wings present. The hind-wings of the female imagines more than one fifth the length of the fore-wings. Hind tarsi with 5 moveable segments. The hind tarsal claws unalike, being one pointed and one blunt. The abdomen with two tails. Male claspers crossed. The lobes of the penis narrow, rod-shaped, and widely separated; without recurved appendages. Nymph. Gills mostly at the sides of the abdomen; not fringed with filaments on both sides; mostly consisting of a plate bearing a tuft of filaments. Classification. Superfamily Heptagenioidea. Family Heptageniidae. British representation. 2 species; R. germanica (March Brown Dun, March Brown or Great Red Spinner), and R. semicolorata (Olive Upright Dun, Yellow Upright Spinners). ##

##17: Siphlonurus Eaton
Siphlurella Bengtsson, Siphlurus Eaton. Imago. The compound eyes rounded. Fore-wings with R5 and R4 joined basally. Hind-wings present. The hind-wings of the female imagines more than one fifth the length of the fore-wings. Hind tarsi about one-and-a-half times the length of the tibia. Hind tarsi with 4 moveable segments. The hind tarsal claws both pointed. The abdomen with two tails. Nymph. The outer tails hairy on the inner side only. Gills mostly at the sides of the abdomen; not fringed with filaments on both sides. Classification. Superfamily Heptagenioidea. Family Siphlonuridae. British representation. 3 species; S. alternatus, S.armatus and S. lacustris (the Duns and Spinners all colloquially called Summer Mayflies). ##
