1 Agriphila Hübner
Adults. Face with a conical hairy prominence (this short), or without a conical hairy prominence. Proboscis functional. Wingspan 20–29(–31) mm. The adults conspicuously sexually dimorphic to not very sexually dimorphic. The fringe glistening-metallic, or not glistening-metallic. Termen non-sinuate. Ground colour of the forewings ochreous, or brown, or grey. Forewings plain (sometimes, in A. latistria), or conspicuously patterned with contrasting colours. The patterning complex to simple; restricted to longitudinal streaking, or restricted to transverse markings, or comprising both longitudinal streaking and transverse markings. Forewings with a median line, or without a median line; transversely dark-lined towards the termen (A. geniculea, inconspicuously so in A. inquinatella), or not transversely dark-lined towards the termen; the subterminal lines when present, conspicuously white-edged, or not white-edged; with a strong white median streak, or without a strong white median streak; without conspicuous white marks at or near the apex. Forewing vein 7 arising from vein 8. Hindwings pale ochreous grey, or pale grey to dark grey; plain. Distribution and habitats. Widespread (except the mainland-European A. poliellus, this being included in the British list on the basis of a single specimen taken at Deal, Kent in 1885). England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland. Occurring in coastal locations and inland. In wet places, mesophytic habitats, and dry places (A. selasella in marshy places including salt marshes and fens; A. geniculea in dry pastures and coastal sand-hills; A. inquinatella in grassy heaths, rough grassland and sandy places; A. latistria in inland heaths with a predilection for burnt patches, also in woodland rides and sandy districts including coastal sand-hills; and A. tristella and A. straminella (formerly Crambus culmellus) common almost throughout the British Isles wherever grass grows). British species: A. geniculea, A. inquinatella, A. latistria, A. geniculea, A. poliellus, A. selasella, A. straminella, A. tristella. Adults abroad July to September. Larvae. Larvae feeding on monocots; Poaceae (Bromus, Festuca, Poa, Deschampsia). Subfamily. Crambinae.

2 Ancylolomia Hübner
Adults. Face without a conical hairy prominence. Proboscis functional. Labial palps short. Wingspan 30–34 mm. Forewings pale ochreous, irrorated grey with a few black scales, with a conspicuous narrow creamy median longitudinal stripe which beyonf the middle bends slightly towards the tornus; a fine yellowish sub-dorsal longitudinal stripe, and creamy striations along the costa and along subterminal veins; a small greyish discal spot; a fine, curved ochreous subterminal line, and a zigzag brown line adorned with silver-metallic scales in the whitish area between this and the termen; the fringe grey, glistening-metallic and incorporating a white line. The fringe not glistening-metallic. Forewing apices somewhat pointed; termen markedly sinuate. Ground colour of the forewings ochreous to brown. Forewings conspicuously patterned with contrasting colours. The patterning complex; comprising both longitudinal streaking and transverse markings (the latter restricted to subterminal lines). Forewings without a median line; transversely dark-lined towards the termen; the subterminal lines conspicuously white-edged; with a strong white median streak (plus streaks on either side); the median streak without a cross-bar; without conspicuous white marks at or near the apex. Forewing vein 7 arising from vein 8. Hindwings pale grey (with a white fringe); plain, or with a subterminal dark line and fuscous termen; very light grey, whiter basally and tending darker towards the termen, marked only by a very fine dark terminal line; the fringe plain white. Distribution and habitats. Found only in southern England (an occasional immigrant from southern Europe). England (E. Kent in 1935, S. Essex in 1996). British species: A. tentaculella. Adults abroad July and August. Larvae. Larvae feeding on monocots; Poaceae. Subfamily. Crambinae.

3 Calamotropha Zeller
Adults. Face without a conical hairy prominence. Proboscis atrophied. Wingspan 23–29 mm (the females larger than the males). The adults conspicuously sexually dimorphic to not very sexually dimorphic (females larger and plainer). Forewings rather broad, the very slightly sinuous-convex termen not oblique, the apex somewhat pointed; whitish or light brownish, weakly suffused fuscous, posteriorly darkened along the veins; either with two blackish basal dots, two or three representing the antemedian line, a dark discal dot, and an oblique row of them representing the postmedian line, or (especially in females) some or all the dots lacking; the cilia barred brown and buff. The fringe not glistening-metallic. The fringe conspicuously chequered. Forewing apices rather pointed; termen no more than very slightly sinuate, or non-sinuate. Ground colour of the forewings pale brown, or grey, or whitish. Forewings plain to inconspicuously patterned. The patterning simple; consisting of dark dots. Forewings without a median line (perhaps represented by 2 or 3 dots); not transversely dark-lined towards the termen; without a strong white median streak; without conspicuous white marks at or near the apex. Forewing vein 7 arising from vein 8. Hindwings white; plain; shining white, marked only by a fine, broken dark terminal line; the cilia also white. Distribution and habitats. In wet places (associated with the wetter parts of large fens and marshes and the margins of broads, but wandering elsewhere). British species: C. paludella. Adults abroad July and August. Larvae. Larvae feeding on monocots; Typha (mining a leaf in late summer and autumn, then after hibernating in its base mining a dead leaf or stem prior to pupating in the larval mine in June). E. and central-southern England and Isle of Wight, East Anglia and Lincolnshire, Dorset to N. Somerset, Gloucestersire, S. Wales. Subfamily. Crambinae.

4 Catoptria Hübner
Adults. Face without a conical hairy prominence. Proboscis functional. Wingspan 19–26(–34) mm. The fringe not glistening-metallic. The fringe conspicuously chequered, or somewhat chequered (opposite the median stripe), or not chequered. Termen non-sinuate. Ground colour of the forewings ochreous, or brown, or grey. Forewings conspicuously patterned with contrasting colours. The patterning complex, or simple; restricted to longitudinal streaking, or comprising both longitudinal streaking and transverse markings. Forewings without a median line; transversely dark-lined towards the termen (C. verellus), or not transversely dark-lined towards the termen; the subterminal lines in C. verellus, conspicuously white-edged; with a strong white median streak (usually), or without a strong white median streak (e.g., C. verellus); the median streak interrupted by a cross-bar (C. permutatella, C. pinella), or without a cross-bar; with a conspicuous white apical mark (C. falsella and C. verellus), or without conspicuous white marks at or near the apex; without a scattering of large black scales. Forewing vein 7 arising from vein 8. Hindwings pale grey, or dark grey; plain. Distribution and habitats. England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland. Occurring in coastal locations and inland. In wet places, mesophytic habitats, and dry places (e.g., C. pinella widely distributed in marshy localities, C. margaritella widespread in bogs, wet heaths and damp places in open woodland, C. furcatella confined to grassy places at high elevations in Scotland, North Wales and the Lake District, C. falsella associated with mosses on walls). British species: C. falsella, C. furcatellus, C. lythargyrella, C. margaritella, C. osthelderi, C. permutatella, C. pinella, C. speculalis, C. verellus. Adults abroad July, or July and August. Larvae. Larvae feeding on mosses (C. falsella and C. verella), or monocots; Poaceae (C. furcatella), or Poaceae and Cyperaceae (C. pinella). Subfamily. Crambinae.

5 Chilo Zincken
Adults. Face with a conical hairy prominence. Proboscis functional. Labial palps relatively very long. Wingspan 24–32 mm (male), or 30–40 mm (female). The adults conspicuously sexually dimorphic. Forewings of the male rather broad, the costa basally arched, the apex acute and the termen scarcely convexly curved, scarcely sinuate termen not oblique; dark or light reddish brown, sometimes suffused fuscous, finely dark streaked along and between the veins, and sometimes with a darker longitudinal stripe from the base to the small black discal spot; the cilia glossy, reddish brown. In the female, longer and narrower, with the slightly sinuate termen very oblique and a narrowly pointed almost acuminate apex; pale ochreous, marked only with fine, inconspicuous longitudinal streaks and the small black discal dot, the glossy cilia also pale ochreous. The fringe not glistening-metallic. Forewing apices pointed; termen sinuate. Ground colour of the forewings pale ochreous, or ochreous and brown (especially in the male being more or less suffused brown). Forewings plain, or inconspicuously patterned. The patterning simple; comprising both longitudinal streaking and transverse markings, or consisting of dark dots. Forewings without a median line; not transversely dark-lined towards the termen; without a strong white median streak; without conspicuous white marks at or near the apex. Forewing vein 7 free. Hindwings white, or whitish, or ochreous whitish; plain; of the male pale brownish-white, only slightly darker towards termen and apex, with a very fine dark terminal line and pale brownish-white, metallic-glossy cilia. In the female pure white, including the glossy cilia. Distribution and habitats. England and Wales (locally common in suitable habitats south of Durham). Occurring in coastal locations and inland. In wet places. British species: C. phragmitella. Adults abroad June and July. Larvae. Larvae feeding on monocots; Poaceae (on Phragmites australis and Glyceria maxima, in culms and roots and pupating in the stem beneath an exit window prepared by the mature larva). Subfamily. Crambinae.

6 Chrysocrambus Bleszynski
Adults. Face without a conical hairy prominence. Proboscis functional. Wingspan 19–22 mm (C. craterella), or 20–27 mm (C. linetella). Forewings broad, cream-coloured to yellowish with conspicuous golden- or rusty-brown interneural streaks of which the two in the apex are thickened and coalescent in C. craterella only; a thick, ferrugineous, slightly angled or sinuous median almost transverse cross-line, a finer postmedian one obtusely angled in the middle, and a series of small black interneural dots in the ochreous-ferrugineous termen; the cilia brownish. The fringe glistening-metallic. Termen non-sinuate. Ground colour of the forewings whitish to ochreous. Forewings very conspicuously patterned with contrasting colours. The patterning complex; comprising both longitudinal streaking and transverse markings. Forewings with a median line; not transversely dark-lined towards the termen; without a strong white median streak; without conspicuous white marks at or near the apex; without a scattering of large black scales. Forewing vein 7 arising from vein 8. Hindwings pale grey to dark grey; plain; pale brownish or fuscous, tending darker terminally and apically, the termen with a very fine dark line or dotted, the cilia white. Distribution and habitats. Found only in southern England (SE England, seemingly both species being infrequent immigrants from mainland Europe). England. Occurring in coastal locations and inland. British species: C. craterella, C. linetella. Adults abroad June. Larvae. Larvae feeding on monocots; Poaceae. Subfamily. Crambinae. General comments. Perhaps overlooked owing to confusion with Thisanotia chrysonuchella.

7 Chrysoteuchia Hübner
Crambus hortuellus Hübner. Adults. Face without a conical hairy prominence. Proboscis functional. Wingspan 20–24 mm. Forewings creamy white more or less suffused leaden grey at least towards termen and costa, with the veins in darker specimens pale except towards the costa; pale specimens also exhibit a fine oblique postmedian line elbowed near the costa; and a pale, dark-edged, less oblique but more strongly angled subterminal line is always present, also a short streak from the costa near the apex, and three black dots on the lower half of the termen; the cilia golden-metallic. The fringe glistening-metallic. Forewing apices fairly pointed; termen non-sinuate. Ground colour of the forewings light to dark brown, or ochreous. Forewings inconspicuously patterned to conspicuously patterned with contrasting colours. The patterning fairly complex; comprising both longitudinal streaking and transverse markings. Forewings without a median line; more or less transversely dark-lined towards the termen; the subterminal lines not white-edged; without a strong white median streak; without conspicuous white marks at or near the apex. Forewing vein 7 arising from vein 8. Hindwings pale fuscous, or pale grey, or dark grey; plain; dark or pale fuscous, unmarked unless the veins are somewhat darker, with golden-metallic cilia. Distribution and habitats. England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland. Occurring in coastal locations and inland. In wet places, mesophytic habitats, and dry places (wherever grass grows). British species: C. culmella. Adults abroad June, July, and August; hibernating (in a cocoon at ground level, where they pupate in the spring). Larvae. Larvae feeding on monocots; Poaceae (on the culms of various grasses, without forming silken galleries). Subfamily. Crambinae. General comments. Often abundant, and sometimes a pest in upland pastures.

8 Crambus Fabricius
Adults. Face without a conical hairy prominence. Proboscis functional. Wingspan 18–27(–29) mm. The fringe glistening-metallic (mostly), or not glistening-metallic (C. perlella). Termen sinuate (mostly), or non-sinuate (C. perlella). Ground colour of the forewings whitish, or ochreous, or brown. Forewings plain, or conspicuously patterned with contrasting colours. The patterning complex, or simple; restricted to longitudinal streaking, or comprising both longitudinal streaking and transverse markings. Forewings without a median line; transversely dark-lined towards the termen (commonly), or not transversely dark-lined towards the termen; the subterminal lines when present, usually conspicuously white-edged; with a strong white median streak (commonly), or without a strong white median streak (the pallid, type form of C. perlella); the median streak when present, interrupted by a cross-bar, or without a cross-bar; variously with a conspicuous white apical mark, or with both a conspicuous white apical mark and a costal one nearby, or without conspicuous white marks at or near the apex (rarely). Forewing vein 7 arising from vein 8. Hindwings whitish, or pale grey to dark grey; plain, or suffused grey. Distribution and habitats. England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland. Occurring in coastal locations and inland. In wet places, mesophytic habitats, and dry places. British species: C. ericella, C. hamella, C. lathoniellus, C. leucoschalis, C. pascuella, C. perlella, C. pratella, C. silvella, C. uliginosellus. Adults abroad May to August. Larvae. Larvae feeding on monocots; Poaceae (mostly), or Cyperaceae (C. silvella on Carex). Subfamily. Crambinae. General comments. The dark var. warringtonella of the widespread Crambus perlella presumably represents non-industrial melanism. It occurs everywhere with the pale form, but is more frequent in damp locations in the north and west.

9 Donacaula Meyrick
Adults. Face without a conical hairy prominence. Proboscis atrophied. Labial palps relatively very long. Wingspan 25–29 mm. The adults conspicuously sexually dimorphic. The fringe not glistening-metallic. Termen somewhat sinuate. Ground colour of the forewings ochreous (or ochreous yellowish), or brown. Forewings inconspicuously patterned, or conspicuously patterned with contrasting colours. The patterning simple; restricted to longitudinal streaking, or restricted to transverse markings. Forewings without a median line; transversely dark-lined towards the termen, or not transversely dark-lined towards the termen; the subterminal lines not white-edged; without a strong white median streak; without conspicuous white marks at or near the apex. Hindwings whitish, or ochreous whitish, or pale fuscous; plain. Distribution and habitats. England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland. Occurring in coastal locations and inland. In wet places (including ditches, canals, marshes and fens). British species: D. forficella, D. mucronellus. Adults abroad June and July. Larvae. Larvae feeding on monocots; Poaceae (D. forficella on Phragmites and Glyceria maxima), or Poaceae and Cyperaceae (D. mucronellus on Phragmites and Carex). Subfamily. Schoenobiinae. General comments. The adults scarcely distinguishable morphologically from those of Schoenobius, except they tend to be smaller.

10 Euchromius Guenée
Adults. Face with a conical hairy prominence. Proboscis functional. Wingspan 20–24 mm. Forewings brownish ochreous, terminally sprinkled black, finely strigulated silver rendering them very glossy; two broad slightly outwardly curved, parallel transverse lines beyond the middle, and a fine strongly angled pale subterminal line which is conspicuously edged distally towards the posterior of the termen by a narrow white patch containing several oval, golden-metallic terminal spots each of which is edged basally by two or three black dots; fringe whitish, with two narrow blackish dividing lines. The fringe not glistening-metallic (?). Forewing apices rounded; termen non-sinuate (convex). Forewing of the male with a semitransparent patch in the cell towards the base. Ground colour of the forewings ochreous, or brown (light brownish-ochreous, blackish-sprinkled). Forewings inconspicuously patterned to conspicuously patterned with contrasting colours. The patterning complex (at least, on a microscopic scale); restricted to transverse markings, or comprising both longitudinal streaking and transverse markings. Forewings transversely dark-lined towards the termen; the subterminal lines conspicuously white-edged (posteriorly); without a strong white median streak; without conspicuous white marks at or near the apex. Forewing vein 7 free. Hindwings whitish, or pale grey; plain; pearly greyish-white with dark veins and a narrow brown terminal line, the fringe white. Distribution and habitats. England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland (but mainly southern: of sporadic occurrence, probably not native). British species: E. ocellea. Adults abroad January to December (found infrequently, reported more or less throughout the year but mostly January-March and September-October); hibernating. Larvae. Larvae feeding on monocots; Poaceae (on Zea and Sorghum and probably feeding on the roots, although it has been associated with stored produce and dead vegetation). Subfamily. Crambinae. General comments. Either an occasional immigrant from mainland Europe, or imported with grain.

11 Haimbachia Dyer
Acigona (Hübner). Adults. Face with a conical hairy prominence. Proboscis functional. Labial palps short. Wingspan 21–24 mm (male), or 34–39 mm (female, with extreme sexual dimorphism). The adults conspicuously sexually dimorphic. Forewings in the male, broad with the slightly convex termen not oblique, the apex squared; creamish-ochreous but irrorated light to dark brown, with a rounded dark discal spot usually associated with a creamy mark on each side, a fuscous basal streak dorsal to the cell broken by creamy marks, a curved subterminal line comprising pale interneural dots each with a dark basal smudge, and a terminal series of blackish interneural dots, the cilia faintly barred. In the female relatively long an narrow, the slightly sinuate termen slightly more oblique; usually rich mahogany brown, with a broad, strongly contrasting, pale costal streak. The fringe not glistening-metallic. The fringe somewhat chequered to not chequered. Forewing apices rounded to pointed; termen non-sinuate (slightly convex). Ground colour of the forewings pale ochreous to brown (sprinkled darker). Forewings conspicuously patterned with contrasting colours. The patterning complex, or simple; restricted to transverse markings, or comprising both longitudinal streaking and transverse markings. Forewings without a median line; not transversely dark-lined towards the termen; without a strong white median streak; without conspicuous white marks at or near the apex. Forewing vein 7 free. Hindwings whitish, or whitish; plain, or suffused grey; in the male whitish, palely suffused brownish especially towards apex and termen. In the female white, and unpatterned except for a very fine dark terminal line, with white cilia. Distribution and habitats. Found only in southern England (mainland-European, a rare immigrant in the SE). England. British species: H. cicatricella. Adults abroad July. Larvae. Larvae feeding on monocots; Cyperaceae (Scirpus, in the stems, where they remain to pupate). Subfamily. Crambinae.

12 Pediasia Hübner
Adults. Face without a conical hairy prominence. Proboscis functional. Wingspan 18–26 mm. The adults conspicuously sexually dimorphic, or not very sexually dimorphic. Forewings pale whitish-ochreous with paler veins, with ill-defined dark streaks interneurally between the cell and the dorsum, with the cilia chequered white and brown (P. fascelinella, the markings darker in males); or dull greyish- to dark ferrugineous-ochreous and extensively irrorated fuscous with only faint markings, the fringe dark grey except for the narrowly pale base (P. contaminella, with occasional melanics); or ochreous, rather paler on the veins, with a conspicuous blackish streak from the base to about half-way and a short crescentic blackish mark towards the middle of this between it and the dorsum, and slightly glossy including the concolorous grey fringe. The fringe not glistening-metallic. The fringe conspicuously chequered, or not chequered. Forewing apices rounded, or pointed (in P. contaminella and P. aridella); termen sinuate, or non-sinuate (convex, in P. fascelinella). Ground colour of the forewings whitish, or ochreous, or dark fuscous. Forewings plain (P. contaminella), or conspicuously patterned with contrasting colours. The patterning when manifest, complex; comprising both longitudinal streaking and transverse markings (the angled median and subterminal lines well defined or faint). Forewings with a median line; usually transversely dark-lined towards the termen; the subterminal lines not white-edged; without a strong white median streak; without conspicuous white marks at or near the apex; without a scattering of large black scales. Forewing vein 7 arising from vein 8. Hindwings whitish, or pale fuscous, or pale grey, or dark fuscous; plain, or with a subterminal dark line (posteriorly, in P. aridella); very pale brownish whitish, tending somewhat darker terminally and apically, the fringe white (P. fascelinella), whitish basally to pale grey and tending darker postmedianly, with a slightly paler fringe (P. contaminella); or whitish basally to pale grey tending darker postmedianly and with a faint subterminal dark line terminating in a dark tornal spot, the fringe white (P. aridella). Distribution and habitats. England. Occurring in coastal locations and inland. In wet places, mesophytic habitats, and dry places. British species: P. aridella, P. contaminella, P. fascelinella. Adults abroad June to August, or September. Larvae. Larvae feeding on monocots; Poaceae (inhabiting silken tubes in or around the culm bases of grasses: Ammophila (P. fascelinella), Festuca ovina etc. (P. contaminella), Puccinellia maritima (P. aridella)). Inhabiting coastal sandhills (P. fascelinella), dry grasslands (P. contaminella) and the margins of saltmarshes (P. aridella). Subfamily. Crambinae.

13 Platytes Guenée
Adults. Face without a conical hairy prominence. Proboscis functional. Wingspan 12–15 mm (P. cerussella), or 18–22 mm (P. alpinella). The adults conspicuously sexually dimorphic (in P. cerussella), or not very sexually dimorphic. Forewings in P. alpinella, whitish irrorated cuscous along the dorsum and with a broad fuscous costal band extending into the apical projection, and dorsal to this a fine white median longitudinal stripe most clearly defined over the basal 2/3; a fine, faint, angulated oblique median crossline, and a brown, white-edged oblique subterminal line angled towards costa and tornus, the fringe whitish and shining with cilia of unequal lengths. In male P. cerussella ochreous to ferrugineous or fuscous-brown, in the female whitish with ferrugineous irroration towards the apex; oblique median and subterminal lines and black dots at the tornus more apparent in the male than in the female; fringe in the male grey and darker than the ground color, with a dark line near the base, glistening-metallic, and in the female whitish with a broken, ferrugineous basal line. The fringe glistening-metallic (at least towards the middle of the forewings), or not glistening-metallic. Termen sinuate (very much so in P. alpinella, resulting in a conspicuous apical projection), or non-sinuate (slightly convex, in P. cerussella). Ground colour of the forewings whitish, or brown. Forewings plain (P. cerussella), or inconspicuously patterned (P. alpinella). The patterning in P. alpinella complex; mainly restricted to longitudinal streaking. Forewings ostensibly without a median line, or with a median line (this faint, oblique); transversely dark-lined towards the termen; the subterminal lines conspicuously white-edged (in P. alpina), or not white-edged; with a strong white median streak (only in P.alpina), or without a strong white median streak; the median streak without a cross-bar; without conspicuous white marks at or near the apex. Forewing vein 7 free. Hindwings pale fuscous, or pale grey, or dark grey; plain; in P. alpinella grey, darkening away from the base, with a fine dark terminal line and a contrasting, pale fringe. In male P. cerussella dark fuscous with a fine, broken ferrugineous terminal line and whitish fringe, in the female much paler, with a white fringe. Distribution and habitats. England and Ireland (England south of Yorkshire, with P. alpinella also recorded from Co. Cork). Occurring in coastal locations (mainly inhabiting coastal dunes and shingle beaches), or inland. Mesophytic habitats to dry places. British species: P. alpinella, P. cerussella (the adults very different in appearance). Adults abroad June to August. Larvae. Larvae feeding on mosses (P. alpinella), or monocots; Poaceae and Cyperaceae (P. cerusella). Subfamily. Crambinae. General comments. On mosses (P. alpinella), or grasses and sedges (P. cerussella).

14 Schoenobius Duponchel
Adults. Face without a conical hairy prominence. Proboscis atrophied. Labial palps relatively very long. Wingspan 25–30 mm (male), or 41–46 mm (female). The adults conspicuously sexually dimorphic. Forewings in the male, rather broad with bunt apex, light ochreous-fuscous, sometimes tinted reddish or heavily irrorated blackish, usually with two small dark discal spots and often other more or less conspicuous dark dots along the major veins and subterminally; in the female relatively much narrower with oblique termen and pointd apex, brown-ochreous, exhibiting blackish discal, other scattered spots and a blackish subapical streak, or almost unmarked, rarely anteriorly heavily suffused blackish from base to apex. The fringe not glistening-metallic. Forewing apices fairly rounded; termen somewhat sinuate (in the female), or non-sinuate. Ground colour of the forewings ochreous, or brown, or brown to grey (fuscous). Forewings fairly inconspicuously patterned (darkly streaked and dotted), or plain. The patterning simple; restricted to longitudinal streaking, or consisting of dark dots. Forewings without a median line; not transversely dark-lined towards the termen; without a strong white median streak; without conspicuous white marks at or near the apex. Hindwings white to whitish, or ochreous whitish; plain, or with a subterminal dark line and fuscous termen; in the male glossy, white, darkened to pale grey subterminally, with a postmedian band of short dark streaks and a terminal line of dots, white-fringed; in the female unmarked, pure white or tending somewhat ochreous towards the apex, white-fringed. Distribution and habitats. England (only south of Yorkshire, local). Occurring in coastal locations (mainly), or inland. In wet places. British species: S. gigantella. Adults abroad July. Larvae. Larvae feeding on monocots; Poaceae (in the stems of Pragmites and Glyceria maxima. Moves from culm to culm on a raft constructed of stem material, and pupates upright within a stem below a previously prepared exit hole). Confined to large reed beds. Subfamily. Schoenobiinae. General comments. The adults seem scarcely distinguishable morphologically from those of Donacaula, except they tend to be larger.

15 Thisanotia Hübner
Adults. Face without a conical hairy prominence. Proboscis functional. Wingspan 22–26 mm. Forewings broad, cf. Chrysocrambus, whitish, and the whole wing irrorated with large black scales; with a broad brown subcostal band which bifurcates postmedianly, narrower sub-dorsal and dorsal ones which thicken subterminally, and narrow interneural ones towards the termen; an oblique, brown, slightly elbowed median transverse line merging with the longitudinal bands, and a thin brown subterminal line which is strongly curved anteriorly and white-edged distally, and the termen ferrugineous-yellowish with indistinct black dots; the cilia golden-metallic. The fringe glistening-metallic. Termen non-sinuate. Ground colour of the forewings ferrugineous brown (irrorated black). Forewings fairly conspicuously patterned with contrasting colours. The patterning fairly complex; comprising both longitudinal streaking and transverse markings (the veins and costal edge somewhat whitish-streaked, a thick obtusely angled ferrugineous-bown median line, a rounded-angulated white one anteriorly darkly edged, and the termen ferrugineous-yellowish with indistinct black dots). Forewings with a median line; transversely dark-lined towards the termen; the subterminal lines fairly conspicuously white-edged, or not white-edged; without conspicuous white marks at or near the apex; with scattered large black scales. Forewing vein 7 arising from vein 8. Hindwings pale grey to dark grey; plain; brownish or fuscous, without marking other than a fine terminal dark line, the cilia whitish and glossy. Distribution and habitats. Found only in southern England (associated with chalk substrates - coastal cliffs and downs). England. Occurring in coastal locations and inland. Mesophytic habitats and dry places. British species: T. chrysonuchella. Adults abroad May and June. Larvae. Larvae feeding on monocots; Poaceae (in the stem bases of Festuca ovina and other grasses, living and finally pupating in a slilken tube). Subfamily. Crambinae.
